# Pied-Pipers

Natural disasters are major adverse events resulting from natural process of the Earth.The recent calamities like Kerala floods, Hurricane Michael, Indonesian earthquake caused lot of life loss, property damage and left us with severe economic damage. All these damage can be reduced substantially, if there is proper coordination and use of the technology. From centuries scientists are trying to predict disasters but couldn’t succeed. The current technology used in TWS or Early Earthquake Warning System senses and gives the information only after the disturbance in the seismic plates happen. This underwater technology is very expensive and requires regular maintenance. If we consider the latest earthquake and tsunami in Indonesia (Magnitude 6.0 and radius of 84km) with life loss of more than 1550 and huge property and economy damage. The sole reason for this is the failure in the Early Warning Disaster System.

Scientists are working on number of ways for predicting the natural disasters. But we haven’t succeeded in building a proper device yet. But from the beginning of the mankind we are observing abnormal behavior in animals well before the disaster takes place. There are many incidents where the governing bodies took proper decision based on the animal behavior well before time and saved many lives, like the earthquake happened in 70s in China, where the government made people evacuate from that area on time when they noticed some abnormal behavior by the dogs.
Still there are lot of researches going on the connection between the disasters and the animal behavior how they are able to sense it. But no one has actually tried to use this or apply it for the detection properly. If not we could sense and detect earthquakes like the animals at least, what if we could tell, when the animals sense something bad is going to happen! 

So basically we are trying to build a device (wearable or implant) that could sense the abnormal behavior of dogs for the early detections. We know that the audible range of dogs is 67-45000Hz where they could even hear the infra sounds. When an earthquake happens the disturbance of seismic plates creates vibrations and mainly 3 types of waves (P, S and L). The Pressure waves travel and reach well before the Shear waves (the damage causing). And there is sufficient time gap between the P and S waves. P waves being in infrasonic range can be heard by the dogs. One study showed that there is huge level of increase in anxiety in dogs before the earthquake happens. They also try to align themselves with magnetic fields. So, when they detect the P waves, the device detects their behavior (using sensors like pulse rate, gyro, etc.) and send their location (GPS). With the help of Azure we can collectively organize this data from all the places properly and send early detection warnings to the governing bodies as well as to the public (SMS) and help in faster evacuation process.
